Building a Production-Ready URL Shortener with Full DevOps Monitoring

A complete guide to building, containerizing, and monitoring a URL shortener with Go, Redis, Prometheus, and Grafana


INTRODUCTION

I recently built a complete URL shortener service from scratch, not just the basic functionality, but with a full DevOps setup including monitoring, dashboards, containerization, and Kubernetes deployment configurations.

In this article, I'll walk you through the entire project, the technology choices I made, the challenges I faced, and what I learned along the way.

GitHub Repository: https://github.com/KunalSiyag/URL_Shortener_DevOps


THE TECHNOLOGY STACK

Here's what powers this project:

• Backend: Go - Fast, compiled, excellent for HTTP services
• Storage: Redis - In-memory database for quick lookups
• Metrics: Prometheus - Time-series database for monitoring
• Visualization: Grafana - Beautiful dashboards
• Containerization: Docker Compose - One-command local setup
• Orchestration: Kubernetes - Production deployment


THE ARCHITECTURE

The system follows a simple but production-ready architecture:

Client (UI) → Go API → Redis (Storage)
                 ↓
            Prometheus
                 ↓
             Grafana

When a user submits a long URL:
1. The Go API generates a unique 6-character code
2. The mapping is stored in Redis
3. The short URL is returned to the user
4. Every request is tracked by Prometheus metrics


BUILDING THE WEB UI

[INSERT IMAGE: docs/ui-screenshot.png]

I built a modern, glassmorphism-style interface using pure HTML, CSS, and vanilla JavaScript. No frameworks required!

Features:
• Dark theme with gradient background
• One-click URL shortening
• Copy to clipboard functionality
• Local history (saves your recent URLs)
• Smooth animations and loading states

The UI communicates with the backend API via fetch requests. I had to add CORS middleware to the Go server to allow cross-origin requests when running the UI as a local file.


IMPLEMENTING PROMETHEUS METRICS

[INSERT IMAGE: docs/prometheus-graph.png]

Monitoring is crucial for any production service. I instrumented the Go application with Prometheus metrics:

Key metrics tracked:
• Request rate per second
• Response latency distribution (p50, p95, p99)
• Error rates by status code
• Total request counts

The Go code uses CounterVec for request counts and HistogramVec for latency distribution. This gives us deep insights into application performance.


CREATING GRAFANA DASHBOARDS

[INSERT IMAGE: docs/grafana-full-dashboard.png]

Grafana turns raw metrics into actionable insights. My dashboard includes:

• Request Rate Panel: Shows requests per second over time
• Latency Histogram: Visualizes response time distribution
• Pod Status: Health indicators for each service
• Error Rate: Tracks non-200 responses

One thing I learned: Grafana auto-provisioning is incredibly powerful. By adding YAML configuration files, Prometheus is automatically added as a datasource when Grafana starts—no manual setup required!


DOCKER COMPOSE: ONE COMMAND TO RULE THEM ALL

The entire stack runs with a single command:

    docker compose up -d

This spins up four containers:
1. url-shortener - The Go application
2. redis - Persistent storage
3. prometheus - Metrics collection
4. grafana - Visualization

The docker-compose.yml includes health checks, proper networking, and volume mounts for data persistence.


DEBUGGING JOURNEY: LESSONS LEARNED

Building this project wasn't without challenges. Here are the key issues I encountered and how I solved them:

1. Docker Permission Denied
Error: permission denied while trying to connect to the Docker daemon socket
Solution: Use sudo with Docker commands, or add your user to the docker group.

2. Port Already Allocated
Error: Bind for 0.0.0.0:8080 failed: port is already allocated
Solution: Check running containers with docker ps and stop conflicting ones.

3. CORS Blocking API Requests
Error: The UI couldn't communicate with the backend due to CORS policy.
Solution: Added CORS middleware to the Go server to allow cross-origin requests.

4. Range Vector vs Instant Vector in Grafana
Problem: Query promhttp_metric_handler_requests_total[1m] worked in Prometheus but not in Grafana.
Solution: Grafana needs instant vectors for visualization. Wrap with rate():
    rate(promhttp_metric_handler_requests_total[1m])


GO BEST PRACTICES USED

Some clean patterns I implemented:

Graceful Shutdown: The app properly handles SIGTERM and SIGINT signals, essential for Kubernetes deployments.

Interface-Based Storage: The code uses a URLStore interface, making it easy to swap between Redis and in-memory storage for testing.

Middleware Chain: Metrics collection is handled via middleware, keeping the handlers clean.


KUBERNETES READY

The project includes complete Kubernetes manifests:

• deployment.yaml - Application deployment
• service.yaml - ClusterIP service
• ingress.yaml - External access
• prometheus-deployment.yaml - Monitoring
• grafana-deployment.yaml - Visualization
• prometheus-config.yaml - ConfigMap for scrape config

Deploy to any Kubernetes cluster with:

    kubectl apply -f k8s/


CI/CD WITH GITHUB ACTIONS

Automated pipeline that runs on every push:

Build Job:
1. Checkout code
2. Set up Go 1.23
3. Run tests
4. Build binary

Docker Job (on main branch):
1. Build Docker image
2. Push to GitHub Container Registry
3. Tag with commit SHA + latest

The Docker image is automatically available at:
ghcr.io/kunalsiyag/url_shortener_devops:latest

This means every push to main automatically builds and publishes a fresh Docker image!


WHAT'S NEXT?

Potential improvements for this project:
• Add user authentication
• Implement URL expiration
• Add click analytics
• Deploy to cloud (AWS/GCP/Azure)
• Add CI/CD with GitHub Actions


CONCLUSION

This project taught me that building a production-ready service is about much more than just the core functionality. Proper monitoring, containerization, and documentation are equally important.

The complete source code, including detailed documentation and a learnings guide, is available on GitHub.

Repository: https://github.com/KunalSiyag/URL_Shortener_DevOps

If you found this helpful, give it a star and feel free to reach out with questions!


#DevOps #Golang #Prometheus #Grafana #Docker #Kubernetes #WebDevelopment
